feat: Adding docs on HCL configs (#1825)
gruntwork-io/docs: docs/pipelines/overview/configuration.md

# Pipelines Configurations as Code

:::note
This page includes documentation for HCL Pipelines Configuration as Code.

If you are using an older version of Pipelines, please refer to the documentation on [Upgrading from config.yml](../upgrading/upgrading-from-config-yml.md).
:::

:::caution

> As of July, 2024, the YAML configuration is still the primary mechanism for configuring Pipelines in DevOps Foundations. The best experience in DevOps Foundations remains with the YAML configuration system, as interactions with Account Factory still need improvement in the HCL configuration system.

Reviewer: As I'm reading this, maybe it makes more sense to more away from the notion that HCL is primary, not even reference migration, and instead brand the HCL configs "experimental" or "beta" or some such, and frame it the opposite way - this HCL config is specifically for brownfield support, and is not intended for all customers yet.

Author: Moved around stuff to make it work more like that.

unit {
  authentication {
    aws_oidc {
      account_id = "an-aws-account-id"
      authentication_profile = {
        plan_iam_role = "role-to-assume-for-plans"
        apply_iam_role = "role-to-assume-for-applies"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Placing this configuration in a `gruntwork.hcl` file in the same directory as a `terragrunt.hcl` file will cause Pipelines to assume the `role-to-assume-for-plans` role in the AWS account with ID `an-aws-account-id` when running Terragrunt plan commands, using [OIDC](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/deployment/security-hardening-your-deployments/configuring-openid-connect-in-amazon-web-services) to authenticate to AWS and assume that role.

In most circumstances, the same role would be assumed by multiple units of configuration within a repository (e.g. all units within a given directory configure resources for the same AWS account). In that circumstance, it would be more appropriate not to define a `gruntwork.hcl` file at all, and instead define a `.gruntwork` directory at the root of the repository with a file ending in `.hcl` that contains configurations that are applicable to all units within that directory.

e.g.

```hcl

> # .gruntwork/environments.hcl

Reviewer: I like that you introduce `gruntwork.hcl` in a single folder first, then walk through and expand to the `filter` usecase in teh root of the repo, nice.

environment "an_account" {
  filter {
    paths = ["an-account/*"]
  }

  authentication {
    aws_oidc {
      account_id = "an-aws-account-id"
      authentication_profile = {
        plan_iam_role = "role-to-assume-for-plans"
        apply_iam_role = "role-to-assume-for-applies"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

In this example, all the units located within the `an-account` directory sibling to the `.gruntwork` directory will assume the `role-to-assume-for-plans` role in the AWS account with ID `an-aws-account-id` when running Terragrunt plan commands by Pipelines.

A typical approach to building Pipelines configurations is to first define minimal configurations that address the most common use-cases, and then to refactor and generalize those configurations as needed to reduce repetition.

More details on how these configurations are defined will be detailed below.

## Global Configurations

> The configurations found within a `.gruntwork` directory found in the current working directory, or a parent directory of the current working directory are referred to as global configurations. These configurations are typically applicable within a wide range of contexts within a repository, and are the primary mechanism for configuring Pipelines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The configurations found within either a `.gruntwork` directory, the current working directory, or a parent directory of the current working directory are referred to as global configurations. These configurations are typically applicable within a wide range of contexts within a repository, and are the primary mechanism for configuring Pipelines.
```

> Pipelines will attempt to find exactly one directory named `.gruntwork` when it is attempting to discover configurations. It will not continue to search for configurations in parent directories once it finds a `.gruntwork` directory.

Reviewer: This is a smidge complicated, maybe worth a visual or an example

Author: Deferring on this for now.

Note that you will frequently see filenames for configurations within the `.gruntwork` directory that are named after the configuration block that they define. This is a common pattern, but not a requirement. Any `.hcl` file found within a `.gruntwork` directory will be parsed by Pipelines as one global configuration.

### Environment Blocks

Environment blocks are used to define configurations that are applicable to a specific environment within a repository.

> The label applied to an environment block is the name of the environment. This is a user-defined label for the environment, and must be globally unique.

Reviewer: We haven't introduced the concept of labels yet, this seems confusing to me.  "How do I use a label?  The word label isn't in the sample below!"

Author: Added an HCL primer before getting into the meat and potatoes.

e.g.

```hcl
# .gruntwork/environments.hcl
environment "an_environment" {
  filter {
    paths = ["an-environment/*"]
  }

  authentication {
    aws_oidc {
      account_id = "an-aws-account-id"
      authentication_profile = {
        plan_iam_role  = "role-to-assume-for-plans"
        apply_iam_role = "role-to-assume-for-applies"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

In this example, the `an_environment` environment is defined to match all units located within the `an-environment` directory sibling to the `.gruntwork` directory. All units that match this filter will assume the `role-to-assume-for-plans` role in the AWS account with ID `an-aws-account-id` when running Terragrunt plan commands by Pipelines.

> The environment block is most idiomatically used in conjunction with other configuration blocks, as the contents frequently involve configurations that are applicable to multiple units within a repository.

Reviewer: The wording of this sentence seems unnecessarily complex.  "Environments should reference other blocks rather than redefine configuration everytime."

As such, you will typically see environment blocks that look more like the following:

```hcl
# .gruntwork/environments.hcl
environment "an_environment" {
  filter {
    paths = ["an-environment/*"]
  }

  authentication {
    aws_oidc {
      account_id = aws_accounts.all.an_account.id
      authentication_profile = authentication_profile.aws_oidc.profile
    }
  }
}

aws_accounts "all" {
  path = "aws/accounts.yml"
}

authentication_profile "aws_oidc" "profile" {
  plan_iam_role  = "role-to-assume-for-plans"
  apply_iam_role = "role-to-assume-for-applies"
}
```

More on configuration components like [aws_accounts](#aws-accounts-blocks) and [authentication_profile](#authentication-profile-blocks) can be found below.

*Supported Blocks:*

- `filter` (Required): A filter block that determines which units the environment is applicable to. See [Filter Blocks](#filter-blocks) for more information.
- `authentication` (Required): An authentication block that determines how Pipelines will authenticate with cloud platforms when running Terragrunt commands. See [Authentication Blocks](#authentication-blocks) for more information.

:::caution

> Every unit must be uniquely identified by a single environment block. If a unit is matched by multiple environment blocks, Pipelines will throw an error.

Reviewer: I think this could be clearer if we used the filter/match verbs rather than the verb "identified" -- this should point users directly to the `filter` block.  Maybe also link to how to confirm that environment filters are setup correctly via local usage of pipelines cli.

:::

### Authentication Profile Blocks

Authentication Profile blocks are configurations used by [authentication](#authentication-blocks) blocks to have commonly re-used authentication configurations codified and referenced by multiple authentication blocks.

Note that this is a configuration block that is qualified by the first label used on it. In the example below, the first label is `aws_oidc`, so the block is an `aws_oidc` authentication profile block.

> At this time, the only supported label that can be set for the first label is `aws_oidc`.

Reviewer: There's that word label again - is this used with the same meaning as previously?

### Pipelines Blocks

Pipelines blocks are used to define configurations that are applicable to Pipelines itself.

e.g.

```hcl
pipelines {
  deploy_branch_name = "main"
}
```

In this example, the `deploy_branch_name` attribute is set to `main`, which means that Pipelines will deploy infrastructure changes when the `main` branch is updated.

*Supported Attributes:*

- `deploy_branch_name` (Optional): The branch that Pipelines will deploy infrastructure changes from. If not set, Pipelines will deploy infrastructure changes from the `main` branch.

### Annotation Blocks

Annotation blocks are used to define configurations that are applicable to multiple units within a repository. These configurations are typically used to provide metadata about configurations that can be used by Pipelines to make decisions about how to interact with those configurations.

The label applied to an annotation block is the name of the annotation. This is a user-defined label for the annotation, and must be globally unique.

e.g.

```hcl
annotation "dev" {
  filter {
    paths = ["*dev/*"]
  }

  labels = {
    "environment" = "dev"
  }
}
```

> In this example, the `an_annotation` annotation is defined to match all units located within a directory that contains `dev` at the end of the path. All units that match this filter will have the label `key` set to `value`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, the `dev` annotation is defined to match all units located within a directory that contains `dev` at the end of the path. All units that match this filter will have the label `environment` set to `dev`.
```

Also, isn't `environment = dev` redundant with the `environment` block?

*Supported Blocks:*

- `filter` (Required): A filter block that determines which units the annotation is applicable to. See [Filter Blocks](#filter-blocks) for more information.

> - `labels` (Required): A map of key-value pairs that provide metadata about the units that the annotation is applicable to.

Reviewer: Might be worthwhile pointing out that labels aren't used by pipelines today, but will be in the future
